Freud’s provides four ‘negative’ characteristics of the timeless unconscious: the lack of temporal order in the unconscious; the failure of the unconscious to acknowledge the passage of time; the indestructibility of the unconscious; and the inapplicability of the idea of time to the unconscious.
In On Private Madness, André Green describes this idea of an absence of a ‘no’ as an extraordinary observation by Freud because it demonstrates ‘that the non-existence of the “no” is the same as the non-existence of time’
<br>

Hume (1711–1776) in his Treatise of Human Nature and Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (Hume 2004) asked how can we maintain the belief that we know certain things. How can we assume that we ‘know’ that every event has a cause: that, for example, we have knowledge that night will follow day? Hume argued that our experience only tells us what has happened, not what will happen. It is not analytically (in the philosophical sense) the case that the sun will rise tomorrow just because the sun has risen every day until now. We have no justification in our belief in causation but, nevertheless, our belief holds. Why? Because of what Hume describes as the ‘constant conjunction’ of event ‘x’ with event ‘y’; the leap of faith we make that ‘x’—say, day—having been succeeded by ‘y’—say, night—in the past will remain so connected in the future. This is belief, not knowledge, asserted Hume. Kant disagreed and set out his counter-arguments in Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics That Will be Able To Present Itself as a Science (Kant 1977) and his Critique of Pure Reason (Kant 1929).
<br>

things-in-themselves give off ‘noumena’. These noumena are unknowable; the noumenon constituting the necessary limit to our empirical knowledge (Kant 1929, pp. 271–272 (A 253, B 310)). Our encounter with noumena is through our sensations of them which we perceive as phenomena, intuiting them in two pure forms: ‘outer’, which is the form of representation of extension and figure (so, space); and ‘inner’, which is the form of representation of succession and simultaneity (so, time) (Kant 1929, p. 66 (A 21, B 35)). Noumena and phenomena are well explained in Andrew Ward’s Kant: the Three Critiques.

