Heidegger believes that the tradition of philosophy was mistaken in interpreting time as a moveable image of eternity. We are told that this definition of time is intelligible only if we have eternity as a point of departure to understand the meaning of time. Yet, Heidegger believes that we are barred from such a viewpoint. We can only understand the phenomenon of time from our mortal or finite vantage point. Contrary to the tradition of philosophy, Heidegger argues that time does not find its meaning in eternity, time finds its meaning in death. The article takes Heidegger's position to task. It argues that it is not evident why Heidegger's account of time should in any way be superior to the traditional conception of time. Drawing on the criticism raised by Lévinas and Blanchot, that death — like eternity — is never at our disposal to understand the phenomenon of time, it shows that although Heidegger is aware that death is never an event in our life, he nonetheless claims that it is the awareness of our finitude that informs our understanding of time. Yet if Heidegger does not see it as a problem that death is never at our disposal, then it becomes questionable whether Heidegger's initial critique launched against the tradition of philosophy still holds, because it is no longer evident why it matters that eternity, as a point of departure, is never at our disposal to understand the phenomenon of time.

If time finds its meaning in eternity, then it must be understood starting from eternity. The point of departure and path of this inquiry are thereby indicated in advance: from eternity to time. This way of posing the question is fine, provided that we have the aforementioned point of departure at our disposal, that is, that we are acquainted with eternity and adequately understand it.1

Time ‘is’ only for a being that lives with an awareness of its own mortality.
Heidegger never refers to the ‘actuality’ or the ‘event’ of death but to death as a mode of being.

Heidegger questions the whole tradition of Western thought which, ever since Plato, has viewed time as ‘a movable image of Eternity’ (Plato, 1929: 37d). The tradition regards time as a linear series of ‘now’ points that can be measured. Time is thereby interpreted as a modification of presence. We call ‘past’ what is no longer present and ‘future’ what is not yet present. 

The present is the nodal moment which makes past and future intelligible. The tradition has taught us that this nodal point – the present – can never be a moment of time because it makes the flow of time possible in the first place. This ‘stable indeed non-flowing or timeless moment’ from which time moves away the tradition has called eternity.2 To follow Saint Augustine: ‘eternity, in which there is neither past nor future, determines both past and future time’ (Saint Augustine, 1961: Book XI, §11, 262). Time is thus nothing but a moving image (’  ´ ) of eternity.

When Heidegger questions whether it is possible to derive the meaning of time from eternity, he thus questions whether it is ever possible to say farewell to mortality. We humans never experience eternity as such. What defines us humans says Heidegger is our finitude, indeed the very fact that we are temporal. We can never divorce ourselves from our temporal existence: ‘eternity as a point of departure is never at our disposal’. The only viewpoint that is at our disposal is the temporal one. Hence, time, indeed even eternity, can only be understood from time. It is from our temporal vantage point alone that we can understand the meaning of time.

In a sense Heidegger appears to adhere to Kant’s so-called Copernican Turn, since it is Kant who has illustrated already the impossibility of moving from the human perspective (sensible intuition) to the viewpoint of the eternal (intellectual intuition).5 Indeed, in the ‘Transcendental Aesthetic’ Kant explicitly states that time (and space) defines the human world and does not pertain to the thing-in-itself.6 ‘Time is not something which exists of itself’ (Kant, 1933: B49/A33). ‘Time is therefore a purely subjective condition of our (human) intuition . . . and in itself, apart from the subject, is nothing’ (Kant, 1933: B51/A35). Apart from the human subject, time is nothing. Thus, it would appear that Heidegger’s first few lines of The Concept of Time reflect the Kantian project.

Contrary to the tradition passed down from Parmenides to Husserl,12 Heidegger wishes to show that time cannot find its meaning in eternity or number; rather, time finds its meaning in time – to be more precise, in Dasein’s originary temporality. Indeed, Heidegger goes so far as to assert that ‘Time itself is meaningless; time is temporal’ (Heidegger, 1992: 21E). Heidegger here not only argues that the meaning of time does not derive from eternity, but that the concept of eternity and, indeed, presence itself is a derivative of temporality.

The primary question is thus not ‘what is time? . . . [but] Who is time?’ (Heidegger, 1992: 22E). Namely, we first need to ask what kind of being, other than the eternal, can understand the concept of time? We soon come to realize that time is intelligible only for a being that lives with an understanding of a limit. For when we think of time, we think of it in terms of restriction. As Shakespeare said in Twelfth Night, ‘Youth’s a stuff will not endure’ HEIDEGGER AND ‘THE CONCEPT OF TIME’ 121 (Shakespeare, 1947: Act II, Scene iii, line 52), or as we say in everyday speech, ‘we cannot turn the clock back’. These expressions intimate that we conceive time in terms of a limit. As time passes, so do our possibilities. The passing of time and indeed such restrictions are thus meaningful only for a being that lives with an understanding of a limit.

Heidegger now argues that only we human living beings – whom Heidegger calls ‘Dasein’ – live with such an understanding. For what distinguishes us from other living beings is that our entire existence is informed by the fact that we are mortal.15 What defines our very existence, indeed, what gives the sum of Descartes’ ‘cogito sum’ meaning is that it is ‘sum moribundus’ (Heidegger, 1985: 437). We humans are destined for death and Heidegger believes that this ultimate limit or end makes all possibilities eo ipso time intelligible. Death here should not be understood as ‘something’ outstanding; rather, we humans understand our relation to death as something that we live. ‘As soon as man comes to life, he is at once old enough to die’ (Heidegger, 1962: §48, 245). We live our not-yet – that is to say, our end – and it is because our life is defined by death that we have an understanding of a limit and thus time. It is the certainty of death, the certainty of finitude, that opens up possibilities and thus time. Possibilities and time are constitutively determined through finitude. Time ‘is’ only because we are mortal.

In this sense Heidegger has managed to explain why time is essentially human and why, in itself, apart from us humans, it is nothing. ‘Time itself is meaningless; time is temporal’ (Heidegger, 1992: 21E). Only because we are finite is there something called time. Heidegger even goes so far as to argue that we should not regard time as a linear series of now-points. Time does not originate in the present; rather, our understanding of presence and thus eternity itself is derivative. To follow Heidegger: ‘The “now” is not pregnant with the “not-yet-now”, but the Present arises from the future’ (Heidegger, 1962: §81, 427). Time is not an image of eternity, but time finds its image in our finitude. The meaning of time does not lie in eternity which is beyond our grasp. Rather it lies in an end, and that end lies within our grasp.

Blanchot believes that this inevitably leads Heidegger to express a rival metaphysics. By doing away with the infinite instance which is the condition of possibility for all being and time, Heidegger radicalizes our notion of freedom and responsibility. The very fact that ‘time apart from Dasein’s originary temporality is nothing’ indicates that it is we who are responsible for giving meaning to time. This responsibility is reflected through Dasein’s finitude. Indeed, according to Heidegger, in our everyday we only have an inauthentic understanding of possibilities and thus time. We live in the belief 122 HISTO RY O F THE HUMAN SCIENCES 15(3) that what we cannot do now we can do tomorrow; we thus live as if time were infinite. However, this expresses nothing other than a recoil from an authentic understanding of time. The open-endedness of our everyday possibilities is made possible only by the radically closed and certain ‘possibility’ of death as the horizon of finite existence. Heidegger thus calls upon us to confront death as our ownmost possibility. Death forces us to acknowledge that what matters to us about our existence is not just specific possibilities but the totality of all these possibilities, our very existence (i.e. our not-yet). It is only by taking our mortality and thus finitude seriously that we are able to gain an authentic understanding of time.

Blanchot thus believes that Being and Time can be read as the desire to turn the fear of death into a passion. It calls upon us to become truly mortal. We should no longer regard death as a given state of affairs, rather as our task. To follow Blanchot: ‘Death, in the human perspective, is not a given, it must be achieved’. It is our task to face death, ‘a task, one which we take up actively, one which becomes the source of our activity and mastery. . . . [The human being] makes his death; he makes himself mortal and in this way gives himself the power of a maker and gives to what he makes its meaning and its truth’ (Blanchot, 1989: 96). So long as we treat death as a given state of affairs we fail to realize that we are responsible for our own time and being. To truly philosophize and think is to have courage ‘for anxiety in the face of death’ (Heidegger, 1962: §51, 254). This concern for death, this awakening that keeps vigil over death, is another name for freedom.

To all appearances his plan is that of a calm and collected rationalist. If men do not kill themselves, he thinks, it is because they are afraid of death; fear of death is the origin of God. (Blanchot, 1989: 98)

For Blanchot, Heidegger’s and Kirilov’s conception of time overlap here. We only grasp our life and are truly responsible for our life once we have grasped HEIDEGGER AND ‘THE CONCEPT OF TIME’ 123 our death. In this way Heidegger and Kirilov have provided us with an answer to the question which initiated our investigation. Time does not find its meaning in eternity but in death. If we truly wish to be human and affirm an atheist (Kirilov) or finite (Heidegger) conception of time, then we need to realize that we ourselves are responsible for our own life and, indeed, for our own death.

Not only this but, according to Blanchot, Heidegger, paradoxically, still adheres to the tradition in so far as being-toward-death is nothing but beingtoward-presence. Time remains the image of eternity. To quote Blanchot: ‘He who kills himself is the great affirmer of the present. I want to kill myself in an “absolute” instant, the only one which will not pass and will not be surpassed. Death, if it arrived at the time we choose, would be an apotheosis of the instant; the instant in it would be that very flash of brilliance which mystics speak of. And surely because of this, suicide retains the power of an exceptional affirmation’
Suicide is an ecstatic assertion of absolute freedom; an almost mystical death which allows the suicide to gather time into the living presence of a ‘now-point’. At the moment of death, the suicide brings the flow of time to a halt and no longer needs to fear an unknown future and death, or indeed God.

This reflects Plato’s contention that philosophy is nothing other than the practising of ‘being in a state of death: or is it not this the practice of death?’

Heidegger’s philosophy thus turns out to be once again nothing but a philo-thanatos. As Plato argues in the Phaedo: the task of philosophy is to charm away the fear of death (cf. Plato, 1914: 77e). This is reflected in Heidegger’s position: the triumph over life lies in cultivating what Heidegger himself called an ‘impassioned [leidenschaftlich] freedom toward death’ (Heidegger, 1962: §53, 266).

Blanchot, moreover, believes that this ‘militant atheism was a mad dream’ (Blanchot, 1989: 101). In the same way as time cannot find its meaning in eternity, time cannot find its meaning in death. According to Blanchot, we 124 HISTO RY O F THE HUMAN SCIENCES 15(3) neither have death nor eternity at our disposal. In the Tractatus, Wittgenstein already observed that: ‘One’s death is not an event in one’s life – not even the last one’ (Wittgenstein, 1963: 6.4311ff). We cannot face and master death. Death is never my possibility because death is the moment when the ‘I’ and its possibilities disappear. I can never consciously will myself to be no longer conscious. Death, like sleep, overcomes us; it is a moment over which we have no control. This is reflected in Emmanuel Lévinas’ remark that: ‘Death is . . . never assumed, it comes. Suicide is a contradictory concept’ (Lévinas, 1994: 73). It is contradictory since we are trying to show mastery at a moment when the subject loses its very mastery as a subject; when ‘we are no longer able to be able’ (Lévinas, 1994: 74). Rather than being the possibility of the impossibility of existence, death is nothing other than the ‘impossibility of possibility’ (cf. Blanchot, 1989: 100).
 
The fundamental problem is – strange as this may sound – that there ‘is’ no death in Being and Time. We can experience another person’s demise but not his or her death – in the same way as we can only experience ourselves as dying, as comporting ourselves toward death, but cannot experience ourselves as undergoing death.19 The paradoxical position is thus that we can 126 HISTO RY O F THE HUMAN SCIENCES 15(3) grasp the certainty of death even though we never die. What Heidegger is trying to articulate is the impossibility of ever experiencing our own death; we only die for others – but this death is not the ultimate impossibility of our existence but the experience of someone going out of existence while we continue to be. The death of the other does not allow us to understand our life – it is not the ultimate limit that makes time intelligible (cf. Heidegger, 1962: §51). Heidegger can therefore never call death something actual but only our ‘way of being (manner to be)’ – it has to be understood adverbially and transitively as our movement toward our nullity which makes all being intelligible. However, if this is the case then, as Derrida observes, ‘there is no scandal whatsoever in saying that Dasein remains immortal in its originary being-to-death’ (Derrida, 1993: 39–40). We never die; we never live our end.

It seems we are not much wiser than Saint Augustine was 600 years ago: I confess to you, Lord, that I still do not know what time is. Yet I confess too that I do know that I am saying this in time, that I have been talking about time for a long time, and that this long time would not be a long time if it were not for the fact that time has been passing all the while. How can I know this, when I do not know what time is? Is it that I do know what time is, but do not know how to put what I know into words? I am in a sorry state, for I do not even know what I do not know! (Saint Augustine, 1961: Book XI, §25, 273

It is important to note that inner sense itself, the awareness of myself in time is not due to a presupposition of an absolute time. Rather the very fact that we have a sense of the duration of inner time is dependent on outer sense. The awareness of myself as existing in time presupposes something permanent. Whatever is permanent cannot have originated in me, for it makes me possible: ‘This permanent cannot, however, be something in me, since it is only through this permanent that my existence in time can itself be determined’ (Kant, 1933: B275; cf. BXXXIX)

Heidegger maintains that ‘ever since Aristotle all discussions of the concept of time have clung in principle to the Aristotelian definitions: . . . Time is what is “counted”. . . . The world-time is sighted in this manner in the use of clocks . . .’ (Heidegger, 1962: §81, p. 421. SuZ).

Dasein never perishes but can demise, however, only so long as it is dying, i.e. so long as it is being toward death. Cf. Heidegger, 1962: §52, 259. 
The demise of the other merely signifies an exit out of life – but life still continues. Thus it does not allow us to grasp Being-in-the-world in its unity. 
‘The death of the other is the first death’ (Lévinas, 1993: 54). 
It should not surprise us that Heidegger therefore contends that ‘All the more explicitly must the existential definition of concepts be unaccompanied by any existential commitments, especially with relation to death’ (Heidegger, 1962: §49, 248–9).


