 loss of libido, depression, and physical debility

 “Grief” and its verb “grieve” come from the Latin gravis, “heavy, weighty” and its verbal form, gravare, “to burden or cause to grieve.”[6] When we grieve we are burdened, weighed down with sorrow and a sense of loss. “Mourn” has its origins in the Old English murnan, “to mourn, to be anxious.”[7] When we mourn we feel anxiety in the sense of angst,[8] anguish, the foreclosure of possibilities, the loss of the future we assumed we had with friend or family member.            

            Some psychologists claim that grief is not the same as mourning: Grief is passive, while mourning is active.[9] We grieve, feeling burdened inwardly. We mourn, manifesting a wide range of reactions in outer life, e.g. waves of forgetfulness, sadness, loneliness, regret, “magical thinking” (that we might turn back the clock or the calendar) and inconsolability, along with emotional lability, surprising responses to life situations, the upsurge of old memories we thought we had let go of long ago, even concern that we might be losing our minds.[10]

             All of these inward feelings and outer forms of mourning are aspects of a key archetype we all experience repeatedly in life—what the medieval alchemists called the mortificatio.[11]What’s meant by “archetype” and “mortificatio”? As the concept of “archetype” and the specific archetype related to grief and mourning are central to our topic, we must discuss them in some depth.
             Jung lived a long life, dying in 1961 just a few weeks shy of his 86th birthday.[42] Aside from experiencing the deaths of his father (in 1896)[43] and his mother (in 1923)[44] he buried his sister Trudy (in 1935),[45] his muse/mistress Tony Wolff (in 1953)[46] and his wife, Emma, in 1955.[47] He was so bereft at Tony’s death that he could not attend her funeral. Emma’s death was a more severe loss, as he had projected his financial security, as well as his psychosomatic well-being on to her. When he wrote on how wives “contain” their husbands emotionally, he was writing about his own experience of marriage, in the context of the relationship he had with Emma. His words about having to take back projections after the death of someone came from his own experience. Jung understood that death can also offer liberation: he had experienced this in his father’s death,[48] which allowed Jung to take over as the head of the family, and to take up the challenge of providing financially for himself, his mother and his sister.

            Like Jung I have buried my parents, and, also like Jung, the death of my father served to open my life to greater opportunities than I would have had if he had lived. In quite a different way, my mother’s death was also a liberation. She had Alzheimer’s disease, and there are very good reasons why they say, in the Alzheimer’s community, that there are two victims of that disease: the person who has it and the person who is the primary caregiver. By the time my mother died, after 11 years of caring for her, watching her disappear into dementia, coming to the point where she did not recognize me, my sister, not even herself (!), it was nothing less than a liberation for both my mother and me when she died.

            How very different was the loss of my fiancé! When he appeared in my life (as if by magic!) I had been working on my negative father complex for 10 years, each year reclaiming the promise in my analyst’s words “as within, so without:” By working on myself, to develop a positive relationship with my inner partner, eventually “Mr. Right” would appear. He did, but we had only 3 years together—enough time to dream dreams together of a future life, to make plans, to look ahead to wonderful times. He died of a stroke, and I fell into a hole of grief that even now, 17 years later, is still with me. All the phenomena of grieving are familiar—the waves of exhaustion, the sighing, the feelings of emptiness and hopelessness, the shortness of breath, the seductive pull toward the “other side,” to join him in his reality, the “magical thinking” of turning back the clock and the calendar, to what might have been if only I had… (fill in the blank). I would see an article of his clothing and succumb to paroxysms of sobbing. I was buffeted by memories that would come up in places we loved to visit, activities we enjoyed doing. For months I was inconsolable, kept alive more by my dream world (where he would visit me, come to me, touch me) than in any outer reality.

            I was fortunate in going through my intense interval of mourning to have the help and guidance of my analyst, and I took to heart the warning Jung wrote about, quoted in the second of the quotes opening this essay. Much as I thought about, dreamed about and focused on Hubie, I realize that I could not maintain a “persistent attachment”[49] to him, lest I succumb to a “psychic illness.” I had to take back what I had projected on to him, and find the meaning in this horrendous experience.

            Given my commitment to becoming conscious, I recognized that every experience in life can be grist for the mill of personal growth. Even in the depths of my depressed state I wondered just what I was to learn from my tragic loss. Over the years since losing Hubie I’ve discovered multiple ways I was graced with this loss. Which brings me to the last section of this essay.

 